>>> ON THIS EDITION, AID
OFFICIALS PREPARE FOR A NEW
FLOOD OF REFUGEES FROM SYRIA.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
ISRAEL'S HUGE ENERGY DISCOVERY.
HOW WILL IT CHANGE LIFE THROUGH
THERE?
>> THAT'S THE EQUIVALENT OF
TAKING ALL THE CARS OFF THE ROAD
IN ISRAEL FOR OVER A YEAR.
>> AND WHY WERE SEATTLE POLICE
HANDING OUT BAGS OF DORITOS?
NEXT ON PBS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>> FROM NEW YORK, THIS IS PBS
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>> GOOD EVENING, THANKS FOR
JOINING US FOR THE DEBUT OF THE
PBS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND." I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
WE HOPE TO BE WITH YOU FOR MANY
YEARS TO COME.
PRESIDENT OBAMA RETURNED HOME
LATE LAST NIGHT FROM RUSSIA
AFTER FAILING TO PERSUADE
SEVERAL WORLD LEADERS ATTENDING
THE G-20 MEETING TO GO ALONG
WITH HIS PLAN TO ATTACK SYRIA.
BUT TODAY IN HIS WEEKLY RADIO
ADDRESS, THE PRESIDENT MADE
ANOTHER APPEAL FOR SUPPORT, THIS
TIME TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE AND
THEIR REPRESENTATIVES.
>> I KNOW THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
ARE WEARY AFTER A DECADE OF WAR.
EVEN AS THE WAR IN IRAQ HAS
ENDED AND THE WAR IN AFGHANISTAN
IS WINDING DOWN.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE NOT PUTTING OUR
TROOPS IN THE MIDDLE OF SOMEBODY
ELSE'S WAR.
BUT WE ARE THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
WE CANNOT TURN A BLIND EYE TO
IMAGES LIKE THE ONES WE'VE SEEN
>> SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
MADE HIS OWN CASE FOR A MILITARY
OUT OF SYRIA.
STRIKE AGAINST BASHAR AL ASSAD'S
REGIME DURING A MEETING OF
EUROPEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS IN
LITHUANIA TODAY.
AFTERWARDS, AN OFFICIAL FOR THE
GROUP SAID THE ATTACK WHICH
KILLED 1,400 SYRIANS CANNOT BE
TOLERATED.
>> IN THE FACE OF THE THE USE OF
CHEMICAL WEAPONS, THE
INTERNATIONAL XHUNTD CANNOT
REMAIN IDLE.
A CLEAR AND STRONG RESPONSE IS
CRUCIAL.
TO MAKE CLEAR THAT SUCH CRIMES
ARE UNACCEPTABLE AND THAT THERE
CAN BE NO IMPUNITY.
>> BUT THE STATEMENT STOPPED
SHORT OF ENDORSING AN ATTACK
AGAINST ASSAD.
INSTEAD IT EMBRACED FRENCH
PRESIDENT FRANCOIS HOLLANDE'S
STATEMENT THAT A STRIKE SHOULD
COME AFTER INSPECTORS ISSUED
THEIR FINDINGS.
HOLLANDE WAS A SUPPORTER OF AN
AMERICAN-LED ATTACK ON SYRIA.
WITH ALL THE TALK OF WAR, AT THE
VATICAN TODAY, POPE FRANCIS HELD
A PEACE VIGIL AND URGED AN END
TO THE WAR IN SYRIA THAT'S LEFT
100,000 PEOPLE DEAD.
THE WAR LED TO A MASS EXODUS
FROM SYRIA.
2 MILLION SYRIANS HAVE SOUGHT
REFUGE IN NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES.
WHAT'S LIFE LIKE IN A REFUGEE
CAMP IN JORDAN?
KRISTEN GLEPS PI GILLESPIE MET A
WOMAN THERE.
>> DID THEY BOMB THEM TODAY?
IT'S BEEN MONTH SINCE DALLALA
LAST SAW HER HUSBAND.
IN JANUARY, SHE SAYS, GOVERNMENT
FORCES ATTACKED THEIR VILLAGES
IN A REBEL-CONTROLLED AREA IN
SOUTHWESTERN SYRIA.
SEVERAL OF THEIR RELATIVES,
INCLUDING CHILDREN WERE KILLED.
A SHORT TIME LATER, SHE DMRED IT
WILL COUNTRY WITH HER OWN KIDS.
HER HUSBAND STAYED BEHIND.
>> Translator: I CAME TO JORDAN
IN SPITE OF MYSELF.
I DIDN'T WANT TO COME BUT MY
HUSBAND MADE ME FOR THE SAKE OF
OUR CHILDREN SO THAT THEY CAN
STAY SAFE.
HE SAW HIS BROTHER'S CHILDREN
GETTING KILLED.
AND HE TOLD ME TO RETURN.
>> Reporter: THIS IS WHERE SHE
CAME, TO THIS REFUGEE CAMP,
ABOUT TEN MILES ACROSS THE
BORDER FROM SYRIA IN NORTHERN
JORDAN.
THE CAMP OPENED OM A YEAR AGO.
BUT AS THE CIVIL WAR BACK HOME
ESCALATED, ITS POPULATION HAS
SWELLED.
THE CAMP HAS GROWN SO LARGE TO
MORE THAN 120,000 PEOPLE THAT IT
ACTUALLY FEELS LIKE A CITY.
THE CAMP IS TODAY THE FOURTH
MOST POPULOUS PLACE IN JORDAN.
ALL ALONG THIS ROAD, SHOPS HAVE
OPENED ON A STREET WHERE THE
FRENCH GOVERNMENT OPENED A
HOSPITAL.
IT IS NOW THE SECOND LARGEST
REFUGEE CAMP IN THE WORLD.
AND THAT HAS PUT A STRAIN ON
NEARBY COMMUNITIES IN JORDAN
WHERE WATER IS OFTEN SCARCE.
THE SURGE IN THE REFUGEE
POPULATION HAS ALSO SEVERELY
TAXED HUMANITARIAN EFFORTS, SAYS
EVA McDONALD OF THE UNITED
NATIONS.
>> IF WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO
SUPPORT THESE PEOPLE, WE HAVE
GOT TO BE WELL-FUNDED.
AND THE DELIVERY OF WATER AND
THE DELIVERY OF FOOD EVERY DAY,
THE PROVISION OF SHELTER,
SOMETHING A FAMILY CAN CALL A
TEMPORARY HOME.
A SHELTER THAT THEY CAN STAND UP
STRAIGHT IN.
EVERY SINGLE ASPECT OF SERVICE
DELIVERY IN THIS KIND OF
ENVIRONMENT IS INCREDIBLY
DIFFICULT.
>> Reporter: LIFE IS CERTAINLY
DIFFICULT FOR THOSE THEY ARE
TRYING TO HELP.
SHE AND NINE OTHERS LIVE IN THIS
TIN SHED.
THEY SLEEP IN MATTRESSES ON THE
FLOOR, USE COMMUNAL BATHROOMS
AND RELY ON A GAS CYLINDER TO
COOK.
THEY GET THREE RATIONS OF OIL,
SUGAR, TEA AND RICE.
WHEN WE VISITED, SHE WAS COOKING
ZUCCHINI STUFFED WITH RICE.
SHE CAN PURCHASE VEGETABLES AND
OTHER ITEMS AT SHOPS IN THE
CAMP.
>> Translator: OUR LIFE HERE IS
HARD, REALLY HARD.
WE HAVE SO LITTLE.
I NEED TO WORK TO SUPPORT MY
DAUGHTERS.
I HAVE TO FEED SIX GIRLS.
>> Reporter: WE ASKED HER
13-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER ABOUT HER
LIFE IN THE CAMP.
>> Translator: IT IS NOT GOOD.
OUR COUNTRY IS BETTER THAN HERE.
THERE WE GO TO SCHOOL.
WE GO TO OTHER PLACES.
WE GO OUT AND PLAY WITH OUR
FRIENDS.
HERE WE DON'T HAVE FRIENDS.
WE USED TO GO TO SCHOOL BUT IT
IS TOO FAR FROM HERE IN THE
CAMP.
DRR I'M AFRAID FOR MY DAUGHTERS.
THEY WANT TO GO TO SCHOOL.
THEY WANT TO STUDY BUT THE
SCHOOL IS FAR.
>> Translator: ALL WE DO IS SIT
HOME ALL DAY.
>> THESE ARE ORDINARY FAMILIES.
FAMILIES THAT HAD WASHING
MACHINES, THAT HAD PICK-UP
TRUCKS AND THEIR OWN KITCHEN AND
BATHROOM.
AND NOW THEY'RE FACING WHO KNOWS
HOW LONG LIVING WITH THEIR
FAMILIES IN A TENT.
>> Reporter: THE CHALLENGES
FACING AID WORKERS MIGHT
ACTUALLY GROW IF THERE'S A
MILITARY ATTACK AGAINST SYRIA.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAY THEIR MAKING
CONTINGENCY PLANS TO HOUSE AN
ADDITIONAL 150,000 SYRIANS WHO
MIGHT FLEE INTO JORDAN, THAT
COULD MEAN MORE DIVIDED
FAMILIES.
FOR NOW, HER ONLY CONNECTION TO
HER HUSBAND IS THE PHONE.
>> Translator: HELLO, PEACE TO
YOU.
HOW ARE YOU?
HOW IS THE VILLAGE TODAY?
THE BOMBING IS STILL GOING ON?
GOD HELP US, SWEETHEART.
>>> TENS OF THOUSANDS OF SYRIANS
HAVE ALSO FLED TO EGYPT.
FOR MORE ABOUT THAT AND FOR THE
LATEST DIPLOMATIC MANEUVERING IN
THE ARAB WORLD, WE'RE JOINED NOW
FROM CAIRO BY "THE NEWSHOUR'S"
MARGARET WARNER.
HOW MANY SYRIANS HAVE TAKEN
REFUGE IN EGYPT AND ARE THEY
BEING WELCOMED THERE?
>> Reporter: HARI, THERE ARE
MORE THAN 100,000 SYRIAN
REFUGEES HERE.
IN A COUNTRY OF MORE THAN 80
MILLION, DOESN'T SOUND LIKE
MUCH.
BUT THEY'RE MOSTLY CONCENTRATED
IN THE CITIES HERE IN CAIRO AND
ALEXANDRIA AND THEY'RE NOT BEING
TERRIBLY WELCOMED.
I'VE HEARD COMPLAINTS FROM
EGYPTIANS SAYING YOU SEE THEM ON
EVERY CORNER BEGGING.
SINCE MORSI WAS OUSTED, POLICE
AND MILITARY HAVE BEEN ROUNDING
UP SYRIAN MEN AND BOYS, PUTTING
THEM IN DETENTION ACCUSING THEM
OF BEING MORSI SUPPORTERS OR
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD SUPPORTERS.
AND THERE ARE REPORTS THAT SOME
OF THE SYRIAN REFUGEES FEEL SO
UNWELCOMED AND THREATENED THAT
THEY'RE PAYING SMUGGLERS TO TRY
TO GET THEM INTO EUROPE.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT A BIGGER
PICTURE.
JUNE 2009, PRESIDENT OBAMA COMES
TO THE CITY THAT YOU'RE STANDING
IN NOW, TRIES TO RESET RELATIONS
IN THE MIDDLE EAST WITH THAT BIG
SPEECH, THE NEW BEGINNING.
WITH THE REPORTING YOU'VE DONE
OVER THE PAST FEW DAYS ON THIS
TRIP, WHAT ARE YOU HEARING ABOUT
HOW MUCH SUPPORT ARAB
GOVERNMENTS ARE WILLING TO GIVE
THE UNITED STATES ON A POSSIBLE
STRIKE IN SYRIA?
>> Reporter: WELL, ONE THING'S
FOR SURE, HARI.
THERE WILL NOT BE A UNIFIED ARAB
SUPPORT FOR STRIKE HERE AS THERE
WAS, VIS-A-VIS, LIBYA.
YOU HAD THE ARAB LEAGUE MEETING
HERE EARLIER THIS WEEK.
THOSE MEMBERS DID ENDORSE THE
IDEA, THE ACCUSATION THAT BASHAR
AL ASSAD WAS BEHIND THAT AUGUST
21st CHEMICAL WEAPONS ATTACK.
THEY REFUSED TO ENDORSE THE
MILITARY STRIKE AND AT THE G-20
MEETING THAT JUST ENDED IN ST.
PETERSBURG, ONLY TWO OF THE
MUSLIM COUNTRIES, MAJORITY
MUSLIM COUNTRIES THERE, SAUDI
ARABIA AND TURKEY, SIGNED ONTO
THIS STATEMENT THAT CALLED FOR
SOME SORTOVER, QUOTE,
ENFORCEMENT OF THE PROHIBITION
AGAINST CHEMICAL WEAPONS USED.
SECRETARY KERRY DISCUSSED IN HIS
TESTIMONY THIS WEEK THAT THERE
MIGHT BE SOME FINANCIAL SUPPORT
FROM ARAB COUNTRIES FOR SUCH AN
OPERATION.
BUT SO FAR, NOTHING HAS BEEN
MATERIALIZED PUBLICLY ABOUT
>> AND WHAT ABOUT THE EGYPTIAN
STREETS, SO TO SPEAK?
THAT.
I KNOW THERE ARE STILL PEOPLE
OUT BECAUSE THE CURFEWS HAVE
BEEN EASED.
BUT WHAT DO THEY SAY ABOUT A
POSSIBLE MILITARY STRIKE BY THE
UNITED STATES?
DO THEY SUPPORT IT?
>> Reporter: I HAVE TALKED TO
DOZENS OF EGYPTIANS IN THIS PAST
WEEK.
I HAVE NOT MET ONE THAT SUPPORTS
A STRIKE AGAINST SYRIA, DESPITE
THEIR COMPASSION FOR PEOPLE WHO
ARE GASSED IN THE CHEMICAL
WEAPONS ATTACK.
THEY TALK ABOUT IRAQ, THAT THE
U.S. INTELLIGENCE IS FALL SI.
AND THAT IRAQ HAS DESCENDED BACK
INTO SECTARIAN STRIFE AND IS
EXPORTING JIHADI TERRORISTS TO
SYRIA AND SOME MAY FEAR TO
EGYPT.
THE OTHER THING, HARI, IS THAT
THIS IS EXACERBATED HERE BY THE
STRONGEST ANTI-AMERICANISM I
HAVE EVER FELT.
THE PRO-MILITARY OUSTER OF MORSI
CAMP FEELS STRONGLY THAT IF THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION CODDLES
PRESIDENT MORSI AS HE BECAME
MORE AND MORE AUTOCATIC, MORSI
SUPPORTERS, MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
SUPPORTERS WENT TO A RALLY AND
ANGRILY SAID TO ME, WHY WON'T
YOUR PRESIDENT CALL WHAT
HAPPENED A COUP?
IT'S COMING FROM BOTH SIDES.
AND THAT'S MADE ITSELF FELT ON
US.
WE'VE BEEN THROWN OUT OF
RESTAURANTS.
WE'VE HAD OUR LOCAL PRODUCER
CALLED A TRAITOR TO EGYPT FOR
WORKING WITH US.
SO THERE IS NOT MUCH OF A
FEELING OF CONNECTION BETWEEN
THE AVERAGE EGYPTIAN AND REALLY
ANYTHING AMERICANS DO.
>> WHILE THE WORLD'S BEEN
FOCUSED ON SYRIA, THE SITUATION
IN EGYPTIAN SEEMS TO BE
DETERIORATING.
>> Reporter: IT IS DETERIORATING
IN THE SENSE THAT THIS IS
BECOMING A VERY DIVIDED SOCIETY.
WHEN WE WERE JUST FIRST DURING
THE REVOLUTION 2 1/2 YEARS AGO,
SECULARS AND ISLAMISTS ALIKE
WERE UNITED.
EVEN LATER THAT YEAR, THERE WAS
GREAT UNHAPPINESS WITH MILITARY
RECALL BUT STILL THOSE TWO CAMPS
WERE UNITED.
NOW YOU HAVE DEEP POLARIZATION
BETWEEN THE TWO.
EACH SIDE BRANDING THE OTHER.
IF THERE'S ANY DEMOCRATIC POWER
GRABBERS AS TERRORISTS.
AND ONE WOMAN SAID TO ME ON THE
STREET YESTERDAY, IT'S SO SAD,
WE DON'T EVEN TALK TO EACH OTHER
ANYMORE.
SHE SAID, IF YOU'RE IN THE OTHER
GROUP, I CAN'T HEAR YOU.
SO THIS IS -- WHO KNOWS WHERE
IT'S GOING?
THIS NEW GOVERNMENT MAY BE ABLE
TO BRING ABOUT SOME SORT OF A
CONCILIATION AND GET A CIVILIAN
DEMOCRACY BACK HERE.
BUT FOR NOW, I WOULD SAY IT'S
VERY UP IN THE AIR.
>> MARGARET WARNER, CHIEF
FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT FOR THE
PBS "NEWSHOUR" REPORTING FROM
CAIRO, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Reporter: MY PLEASURE, HARI.
>>> FOR THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS
FROM THE MIDDLE EAST, INCLUDING
MORE REPORTS FROM MARGARET
WARNER IN CAIRO, VISIT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
>>> IN OTHER NEWS, PAKISTAN HAS
FREED SEVEN MEMBERS OF THE
AFGHAN TALIBAN, A GESTURE TOWARD
PEACE TALKS TO END THE WAR IN
AFGHANISTAN.
PAKISTAN RELEASED ANOTHER 26
MEMBERS OF THE TALIBAN EARLIER
THIS YEAR.
TODAY'S MOVE CAME TWO WEEKS
AFTER A VISIT BY AFGHAN
PRESIDENT HAMID KARZAI.
>>> AUSTRALIA IS GETTING A NEW
GOVERNMENT.
VOTERS THERE TURNED PRIME
MINISTER KEVIN RUDD OUT OF
OFFICE AFTER HIS PARTY IMPOSED
AN UNPOPULAR TAX ON CARBON
EMISSIONS.
THE NEW PRIME MINISTER WILL BE
TONY ABBOTT WHO'S PROMISED TO
REPEAL THE CARBON TAX AND SAID
HE WILL TRIM BILLIONS TO CLOSE
THE NATION'S BUDGET DEFICITS.
AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF 23 COUNTRIES
THAT MAKES VOTING MANDATORY.
THOSE WHO DON'T VOTE AND CAN'T
PRODUCE A VALID EXCUSE ARE
REQUIRED TO PAY A FINE.
>>> IBM IS TAKING STEPS TO
REDUCE ITS HEALTH CARE COSTS.
IN A LETTER OBTAINED BY "THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL," IT TOLD
ITS EMPLOYEES THEY HAVE TO LEAVE
THE COMPANY'S HEALTH PLAN BY THE
ENOF THE YEAR AND PURCHASE
HEALTH INSURANCE ON AN EXCHANGE.
THE LETTER SAID, QUOTE, COST
INCREASES UNDER OUR CURRENT
RETIREMENT GROUP PLAN ARE NO
LONGER SUSTAINABLE.
>>> THERE WAS A SPACE LAUNCH
LATE LAST NIGHT FROM VIRGINIA.
>> 0, IGNITION.
>> AN UNMANNED ROCKET CARRYING A
SATELLITE BLASTED OFF FROM
NASA'S FLIGHT FACILITY OFF THE
VIRGINIA COAST.
IT SOON DEVELOPED A MECHANICAL
PROBLEM BUT NASA IS OPTIMISTIC
THE PROBLEM WILL BE RESOLVED.
THE ROCKET WILL ORBIT THE MOON
TO GATHER DATA ABOUT DUST IN THE
MOON'S ATMOSPHERE.
THE MISSION IS EXPECTED TO LAST
SIX MONTHS AND COST $280
MILLION.
>>> WELCOME NEWS FOR THE
DIGITALLY SAVVY.
LEO TOLSTOY'S WORK IS NOW
AVAILABLE ONLINE.
IN CASE ALL THIS HAS YOU
INTRIGUED, ONE NOTE OF CAUTION,
THE ENTIRE ARCHIVE IS IN
RUSSIAN.
>>> NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, TONIGHT WE TAKE YOU TO
AT FIRST GLANCE, GIVEN ALL THE
TURMOIL IN THE MIDDLE EAST, THAT
ISRAEL.
IMPORTANT AMERICAN ALLY MIGHT
SEEM MORE BESIEGED THAN EVER.
BUT SOME SAY ISRAEL IS ACTUALLY
STRONGER THAN IT'S EVER BEEN AND
NOT JUST MILITARILY.
ISRAEL'S ECONOMY MAY BE ABOUT TO
TAKE OFF BECAUSE OF RECENT
DISCOVERIES THAT HAVE IMPORTANT
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE REGION.
"NEWSHOUR" CORRESPONDENT MARTIN
FLETCHER REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IT'S A RUNNING JOKE
HERE IN ISRAEL.
MOSES LEAD THE JEWS THROUGH THE
ONLY PLACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST
WITH NO OIL AND NO GAS.
SO ISRAEL'S BEEN ALMOST TOTALLY
DEPENDENT ON FUEL IMPORTS FOR
ENERGY.
COSTLY AND PRECARIOUS, A NATION
SURROUNDED BY OFTEN HOSTILE
NEIGHBORS.
BUT NOW THAT'S ALL CHANGING.
ISRAEL HAS AT LAST DISCOVERED SO
MUCH NATURAL GAS, IT'S HEADING
TOWARDS ENERGY INDEPENDENCE, A
GAS EXPORTER IN JUST A FEW
YEARS.
56 MILES AFTER ISRAEL'S
MEDITERRANEAN COAST, THE TAMAR
RESERVOIR STARTED FLOWING
EARLIER THIS YEAR WITH ENOUGH
GAS TO SUPPLY ISRAEL FOR
DECADES, ANOTHER FIELD NEARBY
ALMOST TWICE AS BIG SHOULD BE
PUMPING IN THREE TO FOUR YEARS.
ISRAEL BELIEVES BOTH FIELDS LIE
WELL WITHIN ITS MARITIME BORDERS
THOUGH THE LEBANESE GOVERNMENT
HAS CHALLENGED THAT.
THE STAKES ARE HIGH BECAUSE
THERE ARE ALSO REPORTS OF HUGE
OIL DEPOSITS NEAR THE VERY SAME
GAS FIELDS.
SOME CALL THESE NEW DISCOVERIES
AN ECONOMIC MIRACLE.
>> AMAZING, AMAZING, AMAZING
STORY.
>> Reporter: AND THAT JOKE ABOUT
MOSES?
>> WE PROVED THAT JOKE TO BE
WRONG.
>> Reporter: IT ALL BEGAN WITH
TADMORE AND HIS COMPANY WHICH
BEGAN DRILLING FOR GAS ONSHORE
IN 1991.
>> OBVIOUSLY WE NEEDED LUCK AND
GOD'S HELP.
WE NEEDED THE RESOURCES TO BE
UNDERGROUND.
BUT I THINK THE UNIQUE
CONTRIBUTION THAT WE WERE ABLE
TO BRING IS THE HUMAN SPIRIT AND
THE BELIEF.
>> Reporter: TADMOR, A LAWYER BY
TRAINING, ALSO NEEDED PARTNERS
WILLING TO INVEST MILLIONS.
HE HAD A HUNCH THERE WAS GAS IN
ISRAELI WATERS BECAUSE EGYPT
FOUND SOME NEARBY, AND HE SOUGHT
INVESTMENT FROM THE TEXAS OIL
GIANTS.
BUT HE SAYS NOBODY BIT.
AFRAID OF UPSETTING THEIR MUCH
BIGGER CUSTOMERS, THE ARABS.
FINALLY, A SMALL TEXAS COMPANY
WITH NO ARAB CLIENTS TODAY
CALLED NOBLE ENERGY AGREED TO
INVEST IN ISRAELI DREAM.
>> STARTED THE ENERGY INDUSTRY
HERE IN ISRAEL.
>> Reporter: A COMPLETELY NEW
INDUSTRY?
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> Reporter: YOU LITERALLY HELP
FOUND IT FROM NOTHING.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> Reporter: GAS BEGAN FLOWING
TO THE TAMAR PLATFORM IN MARCH
AND SHOULD BE ABLE TO GENERATE
MOST OF ISRAEL'S ENERGY INSTEAD
OF RELYING ON COSTLY IMPORTS OF
COAL, DIESEL AND HEAVY FUEL OIL.
>> WE ESTIMATE IN FUEL SAVINGS
ALONE TO THE POWER PLANTS THAT
GO RIGHT TO THE CONSUMER THAT
OVER THE LIFE OF TAMAR, ISRAEL
WILL SAVE OVER $100 BILLION IN
FUEL SAVINGS.
>> Reporter: IT TOOK
CONSIDERABLE ENGINEERING TO GET
AT THE GAS.
FIVE WELLS WERE DRILLED, SOME
MORE THAN THREE MILES BELOW THE
SEABED, IN WATERS TOO DEEP FOR A
PRODUCTION PLATFORM.
SO PIPES WERE LAID TO SHALLOWER
WATERS MORE THAN 90 MILES AWAY.
THE LONGEST IN THE WORLD.
THE PLATFORM AND BASE WERE BUILT
IN TEXAS AND TRANSPORTED MORE
THAN 8,000 MILES TO THE
MEDITERRANEAN, WHERE THE BASE
WAS PLUNGED INTO THE SEA AND THE
PLATFORM PLACED ON TOP.
FROM CONCEPTION TO OPERATION,
JUST OVER FOUR YEARS.
THIS IS A GIGANTIC PLACE, THE
TAMAR PLATFORM WEIGHS 34,000
TONS.
IT'S 290 METERS HIGH AND 50
PEOPLE WORK HERE AROUND THE
CLOCK.
THIS IS WHERE IT'S COMING IN.
ON THE PLATFORM, WATER AND
HUMIDITY ARE SEPARATED FROM THE
IT THEN COMES ONSHORE HERE,
FILTERED AGAIN AND FED TO
GAS.
MULTIPLE POWER STATIONS WHICH
CONVERT IT INTO ELECTRICITY TO
FEED ISRAEL'S ELECTRIC GRID.
IT'S ALREADY HELPING THE
ENVIRONMENT.
TODAY, 40% OF ISRAEL'S
ELECTRICITY IS FUELED BY GAS.
IT'S MUCH CHEAPER AND MUCH
CLEANER THAN OIL.
>> WE'VE SAVED THE COUNTRY 17
MILLION METRIC TONS OF CO2
THAT'S THE EQUIVALENT OF TAKING
ALL THE CARS IN ISRAEL OFF THE
EMISSIONS.
ROAD FOR OVER A YEAR.
>> Reporter: THE BIGGEST
BENEFIT, A HUGE BOOST TO
ISRAEL'S ECONOMY.
GAS WILL ADD 1% TO ISRAEL'S GDP
THIS YEAR.
THAT'S TRIGGERED A DEBATE HERE.
WHAT WILL ISRAEL DO WITH ITS
FINANCIAL WINDFALL.
THE KEY QUESTION?
WILL ENERGY INDEPENDENCE MAKE
ISRAEL STRONGER AND HOW?
IT'S A RED HOT TOPIC IN THE
COUNTRY THAT ALREADY SPENDS 20%
OF ITS BUDGET ON DEFENSE, FAR
MORE THAN OTHER WESTERN NATIONS.
CRITICS WORRY THAT PROTECTING
THE NEW PLATFORMS, SITTING DUCKS
AT SEA, WILL MEAN EVEN MORE
MONEY IS DIVERTED FROM DOMESTIC
SPENDING TO DEFENSE.
AND THEY SAY THAT'S A BAD IDEA.
THERE HAVE BEEN ALSO BEEN
PROTESTS ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S
PLAN TO EXPORT MUCH OF THE GAS.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THIS WILL
GENERATE BILLIONS IN NEW
REVENUES.
BUT CRITICS SAY THE GOVERNMENT
ACTED WITHOUT NECESSARY
PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL AND ARE
CHALLENGING THE PLAN IN COURT.
LAWMAKERS LIKE THIS ONE SAY MORE
GAS SHOULD BE KEPT AT HOME AND
MORE OF THE GAS REVENUES
INVESTED IN DOMESTIC PROGRAMS
OTHER THAN DEFENSE.
>> THERE IS AN ECONOMIC AND A
SOCIAL THREAT.
AND POVERTY IS A BIGGER THREAT
THAN SECURITY RIGHT NOW TO
ISRAEL.
THE PRICES ARE GOING UP,
SALARIES ARE GOING DOWN AND
SOCIAL SERVICES LIKE, FOR
EXAMPLE, HOUSING ARE BEING
NEGLECTED.
WE SHOULD BUILD A MORE VIABLE
AND MORE SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT THE
NATURAL GAS CAN TRULY HELP DOING
BUT IT TAKES PATIENCE.
>> Reporter: AND THERE'S ANOTHER
ASPECT TO THIS STORY.
HOW WILL ISRAEL'S GAS FIND
AFFECT THE ALWAYS VOLATILE
POLITICS OF THE REGION?
THAT'S A CONCERN BECAUSE THE GAS
SPACE IS BELIEVED TO EXTEND INTO
WATERS OFF SYRIA AND LEBANON,
BOTH TECHNICALLY AT WAR WITH
AND ISRAEL'S MARITIME BORDER
WITH LEBANON IS IN DISPUTE.
ISRAEL.
MICHAEL LEVY FROM THE COUNCIL ON
FOREIGN RELATIONS SEES BOTH
OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS IN THE
GAS DISCOVERIES.
HE WORRIES THAT MARITIME BORDER
DISPUTES COULD ERUPT.
>> IF YOU DISAGREE ABOUT WHERE
YOUR BORDERS ARE AND YOU BOTH
CLAIM AREAS AS YOUR OWN, IF
SOMETHING VALUABLE IS DISCOVERED
THERE, YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE SOME
CONFLICT, AT LEAST DIPLOMATIC,
OVER WHO GETS TO DEVELOP THE
WEALTH OF THAT AREA.
>> Reporter: BUT HE ALSO SEES
OPPORTUNISTS.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT ISRAELI
EXPORTS INTO THE PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES AND INTO JORDAN,
THAT WILL INTENSIFY THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THOSE
PARTIES.
AND YOU'LL SEE DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
NEW TRADE RELATIONSHIPS.
FOR EXAMPLE, WILL ISRAEL BE ABLE
TO STRIKE UP TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
WITH TURKEY.
>> Reporter: BETTER ISRAELI/ARAB
RELATIONS, THEY SAY, WITH GOD'S
HELP.
BUT WHATEVER HAPPENS, GAS AND
OIL WILL MAKE ISRAEL A WEALTHIER
COUNTRY, LESS RELIANT ON OTHERS.
AND THAT'S NO JOKING MATTER.
>>> THIS IS PBS "NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND" SATURDAY.
>>> FINALLY, THE CONNECTION.
MAKING SENSE OF THE SCATTERED
NEWS ITEMING BOMBARDING YOU
EVERY DAY.
SORTING THROUGH CONTRADICTORY
MARIJUANA LAWS.
WE STARTED THINKING ABOUT THIS
WHEN WE HEARD THE NEW JERSEY
GOVERNOR SAYING THAT SOME SICK
CHILDREN SHOULD BE ABLE TO TAKE
A PILL FORM.
HE SAID, QUOTE, I BELIEVE THAT
PARENTS AND NOT GOVERNMENT
REGULATORS ARE BEST SUITED TO
DECIDE HOW TO CARE FOR THEIR
CHILDREN.
NEW JERSEY IS ONE OF 20 STATES
THAT ALLOWS MEDICAL MARIJUANA.
OUT WEST, SOME STATES HAVE GONE
FURTHER.
LAST NOVEMBER, COLORADO AND
WASHINGTON STATE APPROVED BALLOT
MEASURES ALLOWING RECREATIONAL
USE OF THE DRUG.
TEN DAYS AGO, THE OBAMA STRAGS
SAID, AS LONG AS STRICT
REGULATIONS ARE IN PLACE, IT
WOULD NOT CHALLENGE MARIJUANA
LAWS IN THOSE STATES, A DECISION
THAT CHUCK GRASSLEY SAID SEND
THE WRONG MESSAGE TO BOTH LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATORS OF THE
LAW.
SOUNDS LIKE A GOOD SUBJECT FOR A
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW CLASS BUT
SOME AREN'T TAKING THE ISSUE TOO
SERIOUSLY.
A "WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER
SAID THE ISSUE WAS CREATING A
BUZZ AND THAT THE PRESIDENT
WASN'T HIGH ON THE IDEA OF
ENDING THE FEDERAL BAN ON THE
DRUG.
THOUSANDS ATTENDING THE RECENT
FESTIVAL IN SEATTLE DIDN'T
EXAMINE THE NUANCES OF THE LAW
EVEN THOUGH THEY SMOKED OUTSIDE
BUT DIDN'T HAVE TO HIDE FROM
POLICE.
INSTEAD OF ISSUING TICKETS, THE
COPS HANDED OUT BAGS OF DORITOS.
THE POLICE SAY THEY WEREN'T
TRYING TO TREAT THE MUNCHIES.
THEY DETAILED WHAT THE
WASHINGTON STATE LAW ALLOWS AND
DOES NOT ALLOW.
SEATTLE AUTHORITY WORKING HARD
TO WEED OUT FACT FROM FICTION.
>>> ON PBS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND"
TOMORROW, JEFFREY BROWN PROFILES
BROADWAY LEGEND STEPHEN SONDHEIM
>> HE USED LANGUAGE AND MUSIC TO
EXPLORE COMPLEX IDEAS.
ADULT RELATIONSHIPS IN COMPANY.
♪♪
>> IT'S SOMETHING THAT SCARES
YOU, EXPLORING NEW TERRITORY.
SOMETHING THAT YOU'RE NOT
CERTAIN ABOUT.
YOU WANT TO SURPRISE YOURSELF.
>> RECAPPING TODAY'S TOP STORY,
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
CONTINUES TO PRESS ITS CASE FOR
A MILITARY STRIKE IN SYRIA.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU TOMORROW.
-- Captions by VITAC --
www.vitac.com